Tony Blair has agreed to sanction Labour party reforms in an attempt to calm some of the seething resentment among members over his bungled handling of the London mayoral election. Millbank officals accept that the charge of control freakery is leading to massive cynicism across the party's political spectrum and a worrying decline in activism. No big policy changes are planned by Downing Street, but government officials accept that the rhetoric needs softening if Labour's disillusioned core vote is to be persuaded to turn out at the general election. Strategists acknowledge that the losses in the council elections were slightly higher than expected, but were dismayed by the collapse of Labour's share of the vote in the London assembly elections. The fall in the party vote to 32% rivalled last year's disaster in its Welsh heartlands and is the worst London borough results for Labour since 1982. Jim Fitzpatrick, chairman of the London party, said: "We never got out out from the perception that some kind of fix was going on." The Tories' unexpected disaster in Romsey is, not surprisingly, being seen at Millbank as the chink of light on a black night. An official said: "The launch of William Hague's new rightwing agenda helps us. It naturally sustains the kind of anti-Tory tactical voting that did John Major such damage in 1997." Some Labour ministers, including the minister for London, Keith Hill, even praised Labour voters in Romsey for voting tactically with the Liberal Democrats. There will now be a higher level of implicit collusion, and targeting of resources, to ensure that the two parties do not compete in seats for the anti-Tory vote. In the first sign that Millbank will move to restore its shattered relationship with its membership, officials said that rule changes would be agreed by June requiring all future party ballots for devolved bodies, or other city mayoral candidates, to be conducted by one-member, one-vote. The proposals will be put to the 21st century party review by June for submission to party conference in the autumn. The reform will mean the unions will be excluded in party ballots for the Labour mayoral candidates in cities such as Liverpool and Birmingham. Officials will defend the change by saying union branch boundaries do not match those of the big cities. The change has been pressed by John Prescott, the deputy prime minister. He believes Mr Blair damaged himself badly by in effect sanctioning the fixing of the party ballots in London and Wales. A Downing Street policy adviser said: "It is incredible that we have lost the high moral ground on party democracy to the far left. In his first three years Blair led by persuasion, such as in the clause 4 ballot. But in government, he has resorted to the oldest fixes. It started inexplicably in Wales over Rhodri Morgan. No one here knows why he became quite so obsessed by Rhodri." In a second reform Millbank will also propose a change in the system of election for MEPs by dropping closed regional lists, a proportional voting system that left local parties feeling disengaged from the candidates and discinclined to campaign. The system was hugely resented by party activists and contributed to the low turnout. In a third change Millbank also indicated that while an electoral college will still be used in any election for party leader, unions will be required to hold full ballots and split their block votes accordingly. Mr Blair has himself in recent weeks admitted that he has gone too far, saying: "I suppose I was perhaps too concerned about the party returning to the 80s." Officials also said they might postpone plans to abolish meetings of general committees, the current democratic building block of local parties. The mood of contrition within Downing Street will not stretch as far as letting Ken Livingstone back into the fold, a demand being raised by Mark Seddon, a leftwing member of Labour's national executive and editor of Tribune. Millbank responded by saying: "Ken will not be coming for at least another five years." Disturbingly for Mr Blair, many of his natural allies are worried that he no longer has a strategy for the party. Critics of Margaret McDonagh, the party's general secretary, say she is an extremely good organiser and administrator but not hugely political. There has also been a steady departure of staff from Millbank, including irreplaceable figures such as Phil Wilson, Mr Blair's loyal organiser from his Sedgefield constituency. Other Blairites, worried by the loss of political direction, have formed a Labour renewal network and are trying to engage Millbank and the Downing Street political unit in dialogue. Its organiser, Neal Lawson, said: "There has to be a compromise between mad oppositionalism and a very sanitised Stepford Wives party. "Millbank has to realise that they cannot only have a membership of cheerleaders who go leafletting every Sunday."