The lift goes up and up, and eventually stops at Light Entertainment Heaven, which many sensible souls would surely regard as a hellish place to be. Here on the fifteenth floor of a central London hotel, while foreign guests are tucking into their £13.95 Full English Breakfasts, BBC gods Terry Wogan and Alan Titchmarsh are engaging in cocklewarming green-room banter, the stuff of a hundred TV charity specials. 'It's you! You're following me!' says Wogan, though in fact he was the last to arrive. 'I saw you at the Ivy last night.' 'Were you there?' Titchmarsh bounces on the edge of his seat. 'So was Donald Sutherland!' 'I doubt', says Wogan, with morose sagacity, 'that he knew who either of us were.' A surprisingly brown man in charcoal suit, periwinkle shirt and lemon tie, he prepares for his close-up by gazing out, a captain on the high seas, over Portland Place towards the smooth white cliffs of Broadcasting House where he has just finished his Radio 2 show. 'No, nothing for me there. I hope you're taking this from above,' he admonishes John, the photographer. 'At my age, I have to be shot from above. Jesus, with three chins, it's kindness.' In between poses, he and Titchmarsh are comparing the cuts and grazes inflicted on them by broadsheet hacks. I find it rather shocking to hear Wogan - popularly believed to be the Beeb's equivalent of the Costas because of his ceaselessly sunny good nature - refer to one interviewer from another broadsheet, who said some quite unkind things about his hair, as 'fat and ugly'. It occurs to me that this is a shot across the bow, and for a moment, I see him in an entirely different and rather exciting light, closer to the sinister Wogan figure he played in Bob Martin, a Godfather type who was malevolently territorial about Michael Barrymore's attempts to take over the Eurovision presenting slot. But then Titchmarsh expertly defuses the tension with a smooth 'So she didn't like you, then?' and Terry laughs, and it's another safe daytime moment. (In case you are curious, though the Wogan 'do' is certainly idiosyncratic, it does not really resemble 'a hairy croissant', and is convincingly threaded with white.) For most of our meeting he is Velcro'd to his trademark tone of amiably surreal self-deprecation: a tone which echoes throughout the BBC's L.E. archive, from the Radio 2 breakfast show, which he has presented intermittently since 1972, through to Celebrity Squares, Come Dancing, Blankety Blank and the Eurovision Song Contest, due to kick off this Saturday in Stockholm. Eurovision is perceived as his annual Finest Hour, or three. Though he has reported on it since 'just after the Napoleonic Wars', it has only comparatively recently become a plum date in the kitsch calendar, and the subject of camp West End musicals. Much of its popularity is due to Wogan's commentary, which has turned him into a cult figure and hero of Chris Evans. Not bad for a 64-year-old blazer-wearer who was widely believed to be washed up in 1992, when his knee-patting chat show was axed to make way for Eldorado. Eurovision is as soft a target as room-temperature butter, but Wogan is, as the Guardian 's Nancy Banks-Smith observes fondly, 'a lifebelt presence' on the night: his observations on costumes, tunes, sets and the folk dances of the host country always nail the absurdity of the moment, and leave you rolling helplessly on the carpet. It's a skill of which Wogan is vaguely dismissive. He is robust about what makes for popular broadcasting, saying that it invariably boils down to predictability and repetition. 'I'm reflecting what the viewer's thinking. Perhaps I say it just a beat before they say it. It's like answering questions on Who Wants to be a Millionaire?, just getting the answer in quickly.' He admits that he has marked his life out in Song Contests. 'It's like the Horse of the Year Show. It seems to come up every six weeks. You think: Oh God, not again!' Whether or not you believe Wogan when he insists that the rest of Europe - and Israel, of course, let's not forget Israel - considers the Eurovision itself a cultural highpoint, 'a feast of fine music', is another matter entirely, and possibly not a laughing one. 'This year will not disappoint,' he declares. 'I have seen the previews. I would advise anyone, even if the worse for drink, to stay awake for the Swedish entry. Every so often the Swedes have a rush of blood to the head and take off to the far north and reinvent their Lapp traditions. I won't say more than that. I can only say that it is bizarre.' Wogan is often accused of being bland but in fact he is a master of the bizarre: his Radio 2 show, peppered with catchphrases such as 'I'll put that in a glass case and throw sugar at it', is completely incomprehensible to the first-time listener. And yet the first-time listeners keep breaking the pain barrier and returning for a diet of 'maundering' and Roy Orbison records: audience figures are extremely healthy, more than seven million at the last count, not far off the eight million who were tuning in before he abandoned Radio 2 for TV in the mid-Eighties. He gets 600 e-mails a day, many of which fuel whimsical digressions, but he never visualises his listeners: he has a horror of 'having to address an audience full of people'. It's certainly true that he makes a beeline for the seat alongside me on the banquette, making eye contact virtually impossible. And still, at this remove, his charm is ticklish and insistent: a feather duster wielded at arm's length. As a schoolboy, he came home and firmly shut the garden gate behind him, to keep out the rest of the world. 'I've always wanted my own space, I've always been happy on my own. I'm not particularly gregarious, and that's probably ideal for being a broadcaster. I like talking to myself, maundering on.' When asked a few years ago about how his nationality had influenced his personality, he answered: 'A fear of silence. The Irish abhor a vacuum, particularly in conversation.' On air, he is relentlessly, brilliantly trivial. 'Why should my opinion count for anything? I don't think you have a right, because of an accident, to lumber people with your subjective opinions. Better to keep your nose clean.' But this seeps over into the way he seems to view his life, too. When he tells me about a letter bomb being sent to him at Broadcasting House, he's much more interested in the gag ('All the traffic stopped! "A bomb for Terry!" The only thing is, this person could not have been a regular listener, because I was away at the time!') than in the 'loony' who sent it to him in the first place. Michael Terence Wogan was born in Limerick, the son of a 'grocer's curate' at Leverett &amp; Fry who went on to become managing director. Since his dad was also christened Michael, his mother called him Terry, which is 'not a name I've ever been tremendously fond of. I'd rather have been called something more manly... Rot Gonad, for instance.' The elder of two boys (his brother works for Aer Lingus), Wogan was educated by Jesuits who extolled the values of humility and self-control. He describes himself as entirely without ambition, which makes it all the more odd that as a 21-year-old bank clerk, he bothered to respond to an ad for RTE newsreaders in the paper. Wogan's letter was one of 5,000 and yet, with no experience, he got the job. What had galvanised him to apply? Wogan is not helpful. 'I don't know. I was a great radio listener ... TV hadn't started in Ireland at the time, so we used to watch the BBC. Coming down the hill into Dublin, all you could see were these minor pylons, 40 to 50ft aerials, sticking up into the sky, getting fringe reception. I don't know why I got the job, to be honest.' But he made a name for himself, and when Radio 1 launched, he was in the station's inaugural line-up, his Irishness rendering him safely classless. Eventually, he and Helen, whom he calls 'the current Mrs Wogan' (they've been married for 35 years), sold their house in Ireland and moved over to the Home Counties, where they raised three children. They have no plans to go back. Wogan is reluctant to analyse his motives or success. Perhaps he is keeping his powder dry in preparation for his autobiography, which comes out in September, but he does seem almost superstitious when talking about his career, like a nervous traveller who suspects the plane might fall out of the sky if they stopped to think about the unlikeliness of flight. He never watches himself on telly, for instance. 'You might watch yourself and think, "Oh, that's an appealing thing I did there, oh, that's attractive", and then you might end up winking like Anne Robinson for the rest of your life, trapped in what you fancied was an engaging little habit.' He hates preparation. While presenting Wogan, he was famous for doing as little research on his guests as possible. 'I'm a great believer in spontaneity, mainly because I don't have the capacity to take pains. My father used to take enormous pains. He was a fly fisherman, and we used to go out on a Sunday, and the sun would be going down before he cast the first fly out over the river. What he really liked to do was tie the flies and get ready, and naturally this built up resentment in a young man. If it didn't come easily, I walked away from it.' Much of this insouciance is a pose, but Wogan is far less sentimental than I'd expected. The BBC, with whom he will always be inextricably linked in the popular imagination, comes in for a big rubbishing. Auntie's bloomers? More like Auntie's fig leaf. BBC Talent is 'nonsense. The BBC is inundated with tapes and videos and scripts every day of the year, and all you've got to do is employ somebody who actually knows something about scripts or presenters to analyse the mail. A total waste of time.' Would he do a Des Lynam? 'Of course I would. I have no loyalty to the BBC. The BBC doesn't care about me. It doesn't give a toss about me!' He thinks he's washed up on telly, with the exception of the Eurovision, and is even toying with the idea of not renewing his Radio 2 contract when it runs out (if it gets that far. He implies, darkly, that the BBC may not want to keep him on). 'I'm giving it another two years and then I shall be so well advanced in years that I probably won't be able to get out of bed.' Perhaps he means it; perhaps he doesn't. But his public is unlikely to let him go without a fight. As we say goodbye, Terry opens his brown briefcase and there, alongside what looks suspiciously like a tube of cover-up, is a strange object: a fabric portrait of the man himself, framed and ready to pop on the mantelpiece. 'It took a sub-editor on Cross Stitch magazine 60 hours to do this,' he says, in the same baffled tones that we will be hearing next Saturday. What on earth will he do with it? 'I'll put it in a glass case and throw sugar at it.' Eurovision 2000: a preview of the worst lyrics Norway 'My Heart Goes Boom' performed by Charmed 'A radio was singing/ Something blue in perfect tune/ Half a smile as you sat down/ I couldn't seem to keep my eyes on you' Romania 'The Moon' performed by Taxi 'And I listen how the wind/ Is playing among the stars on night/ And I don't think I want more/ But I wait for the moon/ To play hide and seek into your hair/ My heart will always beat for you' Germany 'What Do You Have There?' performed by Stefan Raab 'What do you have there?/ What do you have there?/ What do you have there?/ What do you have there?' Belgium 'I want to Live' performed by Nathalie Sorce 'The wish to live for eternity/ The wish to live has gone past us/ The wish to life will remain enamelled/ Like in a book we have discovered again' Israel 'Happy' performed by The Ping Pong Band 'Ho... Ho... All happy/ Ho, ho, ho, ho/ All happy' Ireland 'Millennium of Love' performed by Eamonn Toal 'Celebrate the new Millennium of Love/ Where our footsteps leave a harvest for the children/ Somewhere on our journey lies a world beyond compare/ I believe we all have the answer'