Sinead, from the BBC's sensitivesomething new drama series Hearts and Bones, looked a bit like Molly Ringwald after ECT, and talked as though she had a mouth full of strawberry shortcake and clotted cream. Just like a tenacious, little, marshmallow turd stuck to the sole of a trainer, Sinead was the 'friend' who nobody in the gang had quite managed to shake off, so she'll probably die in episode six. Anyway, she was in love, neatly, with another redhead, Mark (the estimable Damian Lewis, late of the excellent Warriors), but he was oblivious to Sinead's feelings, having long been involved in a bit of inter-follicular miscegenation with a raven-haired beauty. Meanwhile, his intended, Emma, the mother of his son, was a bored and slightly tortured sensitivesomething played by Dervla Kirwan, who is almost as famous for her love life as she is for her acting. However, Emma wasn't too keen on the idea of marrying Mark because she wanted to sleep with his brother, Richard, the blond butcher, (Hugo Full Monty Speer), who was involved with a (blond) hairdresser called Louise, (Amanda Holden). In real life, Holden is married to Les Family Fortunes Dennis and, over Easter, both could be seen in Happy Birthday Shakespeare, during which Holden had an affair with Neil Morrissey, whose character was married to Dervla Kirwan. Anyway, if you still can't quite place Amanda, she is to be found on the cover of the current Radio Times (Dervla was on it last week) among a bunch of other shiny, young sorts in parochial version of the Vanity Fair 'new talent' covers. But I digress. Emma doesn't want much out of life - just some wildly inventive sex with Richard, with whom she's convinced herself she's in love. But is Richard suddenly going to get promoted to head of the sausage department, keep her in cow pies till the pigs come home? I don't think so. Anyway, Mark is a teacher, probably with prospects. The night before Emma marries Mark, she gets off with a colleague during one of those warm Asti Spumante, strip-lighting and novelty-balloon fests we recognise as the office party. So the next day, while Sinead reads a Native American poem ('You have made a building out of heart and bone...') at the register office and everybody sniggers, Emma plights her troth to Mark, wearing a livid-looking lovebite concealed under a scarf. Mark spots it later, though during the pub lunch-cum-reception, and just before the credits rolled, you could see that his world was about to implode quite redly. So far, Hearts and Bones is everything that Metropolis isn't: well-written, empathetically acted, not too scarily hip, plausibly plotted, directed with intimacy and intelligence and boasting real red-headed actors playing genuine red-headed characters. In fact, despite the fact that you couldn't really care less about any of the characters, H&amp;B is the model of a post-This Life sensitivesomething drama. Metropolis, on the other hand, is quite an extraordinary piece of garbage. After watching the first two episodes, I thought I'd better make sure that this really was as bad as it appeared to be by watching the remaining six in one sitting. By the end, I was nostalgic for the beginning, when things had merely looked crass and heavy-handed in an amusing sort of way, rather than exasperatingly, enragingly, depressingly and expensively crass and heavy-handed. Metropolis was written by Peter Morgan, who was responsible for the charmless romantic comedy Martha, Meet Frank, Daniel and Lawrence. Morgan had obviously used up too many first names in one go, so in the sparklingly-titled Metropolis, he reprises a Frank, this time giving it to his (dyed but meant to be real) red-headed character, an insurance- claims inspector whose pudding-basin hairdo starts off bright copper before a brief phase of dirty blondness, ending up gleaming and burnished again, like a Burne-Jones babe. But, frankly, tonsorial continuity was the least of Frank's problems - somewhere behind being completely and utterly redundant plotwise. But then he's not alone in that. As in Hearts and Bones, Metropolis revolves around the lives of six former college friends muddling along together, preparing to knock loudly on the door of 30 shouting: 'Let me in, I'm a grown-up', but wondering quite why they've bothered staying friends. Apparently - and here's the science bit - six is the perfect number of characters for an ensemble comedy drama-cum-thriller-thing: enough to cover the bases vis-à-vis beauty, brains and losers, but not so many that you forget their names or who's sleeping with whom. Unless it's Friends, of course, where no losers are ever allowed, so help them God. In Britain, however, everybody can be both a loser and loathsome. Though to be a loser and loathsome and clichéd and unfunny as well is, I think, almost unforgivable. And to squander a bunch of young actors with everything professionally still to live for is clearly downright wicked. There is a stalker character in Metropolis who is played so badly by James Purefoy that he should be grateful he has three distracting movies currently awaiting release. Portraying all-purpose psychosis, Purefoy adopts a terrifying, high-pitched, wheedling and eye-rolling routine which makes him look and as though he were auditioning to play Tinky Winky. And then there's Flora Montgomery as a Tory sleazebitchlet on the make, who is clearly very comfortable with non-gratuitous semi-nudity. Or, come to that, totally gratuitous semi-nudity. Unfortunately, even while wearing Agent Provocateur underwear, she smoulders like the young Princess Anne preparing to take a particularly exhilarating jump at Badminton. Then there is James Fox who, very tragically - and at the age of, what? fifty- or sixtysomething? - is finally revealed to have been earning his living as an actor under completely false pretences for all these years. Wooden? The man arrived on set with instructions for self-assembly. Still, given that Fox's character is a billionaire, patrician financier called, er, Milton Friedkin, who lives in a hotel and owns all the gold in the world you can't really blame him. 'Arrr-harrr!' Milton tells his young lover at one point later in the series. 'Read the signs and everything falls into place.' This is advice the whole cast might have been advised to take to heart and bone. Still, I think I may have to return to Metropolis in the next few weeks because I haven't yet had the opportunity to write about Gina Bellman, who this week crops up as an Armenian widow and seduces Frank. In the meantime, however, you can see the beautiful Ms Bellman on the front cover of Radio Times, right there alongside Hearts and Bones 's Amanda Holden and another of Metropolis 's feckless yoofs, Matthew Rhys. And Krishnan Guru-Murthy who, by some extraordinary oversight, has totally failed to land himself a part in a sensitivesomething comedy drama thriller series. Yet. Anyway, this week sees the start of yet another new sensitivesomething comedy drama series, on BBC 2. This one is called Coupling and, rather confusingly, stars Gina Bellman. And Jack Davenport, from This Life. I think I need a little lie down. Da Ali G Show finished this week. I dismissed it when it started but I was wrong. Anyway, I'm in a slightly less sour mood this week, so I freely admit to a titter when Ali told Anita Roddick that 'me clothes are made out of an animal called a Crylic. It lives in Taiwan. Over 20 Crylics were used to make the pants'. And a howl, no less, when, on the brink of death, Ali found himself briefly in Heaven, in front of Jah. 'While I'm up here, I couldn't get another couple of inches?' he wondered. But Jah told it like it is: 'No, 11 is enough for any man.' Amen to that.